This
is January 14, and we're in College Station at 310
Suffolk, and I'm talking with Charles E. Chuck
McCandless, whom I think grew up in Dallas. Chuck,
would you give a biographical summary as you
recall it until you got here to be a member of this
faculty and staff? Sure. I was born in Dallas,
Texas, July 26, 1931. We're in Trinity Heights,
which is part of Oak Cliff. Moved to East Dallas in
fifth grade. Then moved to North Dallas to Alex W.
Stevens Junior High School. Then North Dallas
High School. Graduated from North Dallas. Then I
went my freshman year at Abilene Christian
College. Found that we didn't exactly match up too
well. So I transferred to North Texas State
University. Went there for a year and a half. And
then the Korean police action broke out. And I
volunteered to join the Air Force. Served in the
Air Force for two years, 10 months, and 18 days. Got
out, and by that time had been married. I had one
child when I got out, and my wife was pregnant with
our second child. She was born in February. In June
of 1954, I started at A&M as a physical education
major. Graduated in 56. Became the junior high
school football and basketball coach at
Sillsbury, Texas. After two years I became the
counselor and then I left Silsby to go to North
Texas State University to pursue my doctorate in
counseling. And in between time I got my master's
in counseling from A&M in 1958.
While I was at North Texas I got a phone call from
Carl Landis, and he asked me about an interest in
coming back to A&M as director of intramurals. I
told him at the time that I really felt I needed to
complete my doctoral work, and so he invited me
down for a visit.
I visited with Dr. Landis, Carl Tischler, Frank
Hubert, They made an offer, which I thought was not
adequate. I said no, and thanked them very much for
the opportunity.
And got a call back, and they made a better offer.
And I said, I still felt I needed to come back and
finish my degree. And they said, well, what would
it take? And I gave them what I thought was an
exorbitant amount And they said yes, and so they
took my crutches away from me, and I came back and
found out my exhorter mount was really very, very
small. So that's how I got back to A&E. You got here
when? In August of 1961. Describe
the campus as it was. Much smaller than it is now. I
think one of the major things about coming back was
something I realized later. In 1961, we still had
no air conditioning with Texas A&M. But it seemed
to me we had about 7,000 students. At that point,
the core was optional, all-male,
very large and attractive campus for the size
student body we had. Something not directed right
at the university, but there was a clear
difference between Bryan and College Station.
Remember the sign that said, strong men say no to
strong drink.
So anyway, we'd always thought that College
Station would be a great place to rear a family. And
that was probably the driving reason that we came
back. You mentioned Carl Landis. Tell about him.
what kind of person he was, and what kind of
department he was in. Okay, I'd like to, let me go
back and tell one story, which I enjoy at least.
After I got out of the Air Force, I thought, I know
I'm going to come back to school, and I had pretty
well decided to be Texas, A&M, or North Texas. I
knew about North Texas.
Went to the University of Texas, and the people I
met over there were very much like the reputation
here by the University of Texas. not tremendously
friendly, and having been an enlisted man in the
Air Force, I wanted to be loved and appreciated.
And I came to A&M, and the people I met at A&M were Mr.
Penberthy, Spike White, Barney Welch, Pete
Hardesty, Carl Landis. And there was no decision.
A&M was the place for me to be. I always wondered,
though, if I'd gone into the fiscal office I don't
think I would have been an athlete. So it's
interesting how the sequence of events comes out
that influence your life forever and ever. But
Carl Landis was one of three professors who I think
made a real difference in my life. As an
undergraduate, I was very impressed with his
professionalism. He just exuded
professionalism and tried to inculcate that in
all of his students. He
really was the one who seemed to me to be most
involved with the students in the physical
education department. Only Carl Tishler was the
head. And Carl Landis was a man who was very proud in
almost every way. He was very concerned about his
physical appearance. He was very concerned about
his professional appearance. And the physical
facilities were tremendously important. And I
remember him saying, if you ever walked into a gym
and saw a sagging volleyball net or a raggedy
basketball net, then you knew you didn't have a
very good program that you were looking at. So
anyway, his emphasis on professionalism did a lot
to make me feel that I should aspire to the same
level. He was a fairly well-known football
official. Very well known. Can you talk about that
a little? Yeah, he again took great pride in it. He
was a man who knew his rules and he was very precise
and his calls had the same level of and his
officiating, and something that's distantly
related. I remember one summer we were in class in
G. Raleigh White, and Carl was somewhat prudish.
And in the classroom behind us was C. K. Est,
another football official who was not prudish.
And sometimes C.K. would let out expletives that
would waft into our room, and you could see the red
on Carl Landon's neck starting just above his very
white starch collar and going up to his silver
hair. I remember one time asking Carl, what was the
secret of good officiating? He said, call them
fast and walk away tough. That's right. That's
really good advice. Did he have any
guidelines, any rules? You were mentioning the
neatness and tidiness. Were there any other...
Oh, as physical education majors, when we did our
student teaching, we had to wear white pants,
contradiction in terms, but kind of like white
khakis, the canvas type pants, and the white
t-shirt with physical education emblazoned
across the chest. And you wore that every day for
your practice teaching, and it better be clean and
pressed. You did the end of your undergraduate
degree here, and then your Ph.D. My master's here.
Your master's, okay. Then your Ph.D. at North
Texas. At North Texas. So you came as intramural
director. Correct. Describe intramural, or
intramural program at that time. It was a large
program for a school this size. There were 55 units
on campus.
mostly in the military. In most cases, we had 110
teams because the freshmen competed separately
from the sophomores and above. And with the Corps,
there was not any doubt if a team would be fielded in
every sport because there would be.
One of the real strengths, I think, of the program
at that time was they depended on student
managers. And there were a fairly large number of
sophomore managers. Rather, acceptance dropped
to the junior managers. And then you usually had
about four to six senior managers. And they really
ran the program. Were they, in effect, the
coaches? They were the officials. They were the
ones who took all the equipment out to the field.
They did almost all of it. The sophomores got a
maroon sweater with the intramural seal on it. The
juniors got a white one. And the seniors got a
watch. I calculated the time. For the seniors,
they got about a nickel an hour for what they did.
And one of the things I thought was really
interesting was that there were more engineering
students who served as intramural managers than
any other college. And here is one of the most
demanding time requirements and in the core, and
yet they became the leaders in intramurals. How
many sports?
Probably about 32 different sports. Yeah. What
were the, by today's standards, what were some of
the perhaps unusual? Horseshoes. That was the
most unusual, I think. Everyone ran
cross-country, which I thought was really
demanding because most of them had not trained
very far, very long for it, and they'd go out and
almost all of them finished. And that was before
running was as much of a craze as it is today. Were
there, by today's standards, some omissions? Was
soccer included? We did not have soccer. But
volleyball, it was a really comprehensive
program. Badminton, swimming, diving. Art
Adamson would go over and really, in essence, run
the swimming and diving. He, too, ran a tight ship.
And those contests occurred normally where? on
what we now call the Duncan Drill Field, on
occasion on the main drill field, but we didn't
have access to that very often. But we had
different areas around the campus. Some of them I
shuttered in and shuttered out. On the softball
fields, they had concrete bases and never wore
out. And no one ever stole one down there. But
thought of all the dangers that could have been
associated with those. The tennis courts were
over not very far from the Grove. We used the Grove
for some of the events. DeWare was where
Intramurals was located when I came back.
So it was a program I think anyone would ever be very
proud of. Mr. Penberthy was the founder of the
entrepreneurial program. And then Spike White
and then Bonnie Welch. And that's a pretty elite
group of people. You say he founded it, was it
during the 30s, 20s? I think the 20s. I think about
27, if I remember correctly. And Mr. Penberthy was
still around. Describe him. Oh, Mr. Penberthy was
a wonderful, wonderful person.
One of his great attributes was remembering
everyone's name. And even when he went back into
physical education, after he'd been one of the
upper level administrators, he came back and
volleyball was a sport that he really took over.
And volleyball had just gotten a lot of
recognition by television of the Olympics. And
Mr. Penberthy was nearing the end of his
professional career, but he learned a great deal
about volleyball. Went out to watch a good
volleyball team play, and came back and taught
good volleyball in the physical education
program at A&M. At that time, almost everyone was
in the Corps, and everyone wore a white t-shirt,
maroon shorts, and Mr. Penberthy had about 48
students in class. By the third class, we were
keeping every student's name. When you see all
18-year-old males with the military haircut and
white t-shirts and running short, there's not a
lot to distinguish those people from each other.
Alright, so you do intramurals for how long? Until
63, a relatively short period of time. And then?
Then I went to education in psychology. And at that
time, it was a combined department. And I taught
psychology and educational psychology. In a
short period of time, I became the director of the
freshman courses, which were courses that had
been taught in the basic division, study skills,
job orientation, and some things like that. And
who was the head of the education? Paul Eastman,
the scrum head. Paul Henseling was a former school
superintendent. Again, I'd say that he was one of
them. He represented the profession very well. He
thought education was a tremendously important
area of the university and represented it well.
And education is one of those disciplines that I
think is always suspect in the school, such as A&M.
One of the things that I learned while I was here was
that even when A&M was very small, it was the number
two University in producing male teachers in the
state of Texas, which I think very few people ever
recognized. But with the vocational agriculture
and vocational education and health and physical
education in particular, the Aggie produced a lot
of high school teachers. Now the department was
the Department on? Education and Psychology. And
it remained a department only until
I think it was 1973. You can probably help me on
that. That's right. Somewhere in there. And
the department was housed where? In the academic
building. Fourth floor of the academic building.
And the department during those years was about
how many and number of faculty? I just have to make a
guess.
probably 20.
And then when they divided the department,
education and psychology, and then they divided
the college, just prior to that, they'd separate
the College of Business Administration out of the
College of Liberal Arts. And then for a short
period of time,
Dean Hubert served as dean of liberal arts and the
head of education and psychology. And I think
you've heard this story. I still think it's a good
story. I was the associate dean. And one day, I was
in Dean Hubert's office in the academic building.
And he was determined that he would do no business
for education and psychology in the dean's office
on the first floor of that building and no liberal
arts business in the department's office in the
fourth floor. But one day I was in his office and we
were visiting and he was shuffling through papers
around the desk. And I saw him get something to
Frank W.R. Hubert, dean of the College of Liberal
Arts from Frank W.R. Hubert, interim head of
education and psychology. And he wrote very large
letters, denied. and said, Chuck, those damn
department heads will ask for anything. And I
thought that was, I thought that was Franky. As
department head, he felt obliged to ask for it. And
as dean, he determined that it wasn't wanted. So,
as you joined the faculty, the teaching faculty,
non-compulsory core, co-education, racial
integration, all of those changes are getting
started right about then. How did that affect
education? It affected it in a lot of ways. And
incidentally, one of the things that I have
believed for a long while, when they talk about
integration in Indiana, they're talking about
women. I honestly cannot remember any difficulty
in accepting blacks. but there was a great deal of
emotion in accepting women. All right. Now, on
that topic, share any that you can recall. Well,
one of the things that, again, one of the things
that I enjoyed, in physical education, they were
talking about how are we going to accommodate
these women. And so they were trying to make
decisions about locker rooms and where there
would be modifications and how would we do all this
and how would we do all that and what activities
would be available for women. and the hiring of
women faculty members and all those things. And so
someone asked Art Adamson, how are you going to
take care of them? And Art's response was, hell,
that ain't no problem. I'll give them a cap, a
strap, and two band-aids.
Did the enrollment numbers change? Didn't change
dramatically at first because, as I'm sure you
know, the first change was the change in the name
and the change in women's
being eligible to come to A&M. was for faculty
family, student wives, and women seeking an
advanced degree and not readily available at
other Texas institutions, which meant the vet
school.
There were no real changes in the facilities at
that time, that I remember. And then I think three
years later, they opened it up to all women. And the
real change was when they built
Kruger-Dunn-Bosier-Aston complex, and we
started officially housing them on campus. And
that made a world of difference. Did that make a
difference in the education world? Oh,
dramatically. Dramatically. It wasn't very long
until there were more female majors than there
were male majors. Let's go back to education and so
forth. Frank Hubert was Dean of Arts and Sciences.
That's correct. Describe your view of him when you
were a junior faculty member.
Frank Hubert I didn't have a lot of association
with him as a junior faculty member. I really got to
know Frankie well.
I'm going to go back and forth. But when I first met
him, when I was applying for a job, he was very
business-like. There was not a great deal of
warmth in our meeting. So he was involved in the
interview process? Yes.
I came across, like I said, very, very serious,
very matter of fact, very direct.
Then I got to know them a little better and in the
summers I taught at the adjunct in Junction.
In 61 until 63, I think. The last year I was the
director of the adjunct. But that summer, I got a
phone call. I had, I had just been offered to become
Department Head of Educational Psychology, and
that was something I thought I might want to do. Now
this is about when? About 16, 16,
find out. I can, I can find out. Sure, no, that's all
right. But anyway, Frank Hubert called me from the
when I was at the adjunct and told me that he'd like
for me to be the assistant dean of liberal arts. And
so I came back and I visited with him and he was
telling me about it and I told him that I had just
been offered the job in the department head of ed
science which was a brand new department. And he
offered the job to me again and I was to commit, and
the third time I realized he really wasn't asking.
He was telling me that he would like me to be the
assistant dean. And then something I thought was
really strange was after I'd agreed, he said, now,
Chuck, I want you to understand that there's no
commitment that's going to continue. He said,
we're going to have a national search. And I
thought, whoa. What is this? But anyway. I did
accept the job and very shortly thereafter I was
made the associate dean. And then when they
divided liberal arts and education, I was given
the choice of going to education or staying with
liberal arts and for one year I served the
associate dean of both colleges. And then opted to
stay with liberal arts. So it was an interesting
transition.
And as you asked earlier, the nature of the college
was just changing very, very rapidly. The offices
that were located then were liberal arts. First
floor of the academic building. Academic
building. Share some more Hubert anecdotes that
demonstrate his operational style. OK. One of the
things that I thought was meaningful that I'm not
sure he thought much about, but when he was
designing the offices
for the dean of arts and sciences, he planned the
dean's office on the fifth floor of the biology
building. And when they separated science out,
then he stayed with liberal arts. But I'm not sure
he ever thought about that the fifth floor of the
biology building is certainly not on the path to
any different. You have to make a special trip to go
there. The location of the dean's office for
liberal arts, which I'm not sure how that was
chosen, that was on the first floor of the academic
building, which was on the road to everywhere. And
so I really thought that was the ideal place for a
dean's office because it was so easy for the
students to have access to, and the faculty. But
that was not where the dean of science office was
and is. What about his temperament?
humor, anger, patience. All those. He had all
those.
He was one of the most astute political readers
I've ever known. He read things very well.
And I think his basic nature is reserved,
restrained, introvert, but I've never seen
anyone who could be more effective in smoothing
people. He could move among groups and know
exactly what to say, say it extremely well, and
then move to the next group and make everyone feel
that they'd had his undivided attention for that
period of time. It's a skill that I wish that I had
someone who could even approach, but But that was a
real strength. He had some health problems, and I
think there were times that his health problems
created a situation where he did not come across
his back in particular.
I'll rely on your judgment on this, but one of the
things that I remember
when someone was retiring who had worked in his
office. And he'd had a little more to drink than he
probably should have before he responded. But he
started out by saying, you know, when I first went
to work for Frank Hubert, I thought of him like he
lived as a cold fish. And I looked at Dean Hubert,
and it looked as though someone had hit him with a
wet towel. He just could not imagine that that's
how anyone would see him. But the man went on
quickly, seemingly quickly, to say that after he
got to work with Frank Hubert and realized what a
warm human being he really is, and that was his
message, not the first part, but I'm not sure that
Dean Hubert ever heard the last part of that.
He was... He was a very decisive person. He had
strong opinions,
made judgments quickly about people, some of
which I thought were very astute and some of which I
thought were considerably off-mark. I thought
the same about my judgment. But were there some key
decisions about liberal arts and or education,
which you now look back and see those were
important decisions, plus or minus. Well, I think
that the division of arts and sciences, again, is a
major factor. If you think about A&M today, and you
think about geology,
and you think about chemistry, physics, all those
that are in there, business administration, was
under liberal arts at that point. There were
really a lot of very major transitions that from my
point of view occurred very smoothly. I didn't
feel any great bumps in the road as we went along,
and I think Frank Hubert deserves a lot of credit
for not being threatened by that, but believing
that that was the essential in the evolution of a
real university. Q Do you have any idea how much
role he played in deciding that those divisions
would come about? A I can't imagine that he didn't
have a major role. Frank Huber, as I said, was a very
effective administrator. While he was in the
dean's office and all that, I thought he was as
effective as any administrator that I had known,
and I gave him the political ability to evaluate a
situation that I thought was absolutely
essential. I don't think that most of those things
would have happened smoothly, if at all, had he
really resisted them. I think he was
instrumental. What was his relationship with
Vice President Call and President Rudd? It seemed
to me that he had a very close relationship with
them. I didn't see him with Wayne Hall very often,
but I would have liked to have been there and just
watched the glib pattern that went back and forth
between the two, because they were both very
serious people. one of the stories which I will
share that I enjoyed.